# hiv-phylogenetics
In a startling case in 1996, Richard J. Schmidt, a gastroenterologist from Lafayette, Louisiana was accused of purposefully injecting his ex-partner, Janice Trahan, with a vial of HIV- infected blood. Schmidt maintained his innocence, arguing that Trahan, who tested positive for HIV-1 immediately after the incident, had contracted the virus from the doctor’s office in which she worked as a nurse. Conversely, Trahan alleged that Schmidt, who stored refrigerated vials of HIV-infected blood in his office from patients under his care, had both motive and means to execute this crime. Due to several examples of Schmidt’s previous threats to harm Trahan and the unusual nature of this case, the Louisiana court, for the first time in United States’ criminal trial history, turned to experts in phylogenetic analysis for help in determining the true source of Trahan’s HIV-1 infection.
  
Researchers first collected several sample DNA sequences from the viral envelope region of Trahan’s HIV-1 strain, to compare with potential source strains. However, since HIV mutates very rapidly, no two strains are genetically identical. Consequently, conventional DNA testing techniques, which seek to identify _identical_ sequences, were unlikely to help determine the source of Trahan’s infection. In order for Trahan’s claims to be evidentially supported, prosecutors needed to prove that her HIV-1 strain was very closely related to a strain from the patient’s vials in Schmidt’s office. They identified a single likely candidate from Schmidt’s patient vials due to unconventional collection methods, suspicious documentation, and his failure to reveal the corresponding record to the court. Based on the prosecution’s _a priori_ hypothesis of suspected transmission from this candidate patient’s vial to Trahan, researchers then collected several DNA sequences from the same envelope region of the patient’s HIV sample. Lastly, they sequenced envelope regions from a random, representative sample of HIV-positive individuals in metropolitan Lafayette as controls. These 132 total sequences from the envelope region were compiled into a single FASTA file (`Lab3sequences.fasta`) and were each labeled as “P,” “V,” or “LA,” denoting “Patient,” “Victim,” and “Louisiana” respectively.

In this paper (`Lab 3_PUBH 6860_Varun Subramaniam.pdf`), I used the sequence data in `Lab3sequences.fasta` to construct a phylogenetic tree representing the evolutionary history of the envelope region of Trahan’s HIV-1 strain. I used the results from this tree, as well as those from concurrent studies, to test the prosecution’s hypothesis of patient-to-victim transmission of HIV by doctor’s injection, as well as alternative hypotheses of other transmission routes.
